IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 2, APRIL 2022

5445

Online Coverage Planning for an Autonomous Weed
Mowing Robot With Curvature Constraints
Parikshit Maini , Burak M. Gonultas , and Volkan Isler

Abstract—The area used for grazing cattle constitutes about
one-third of the land in United States. In this paper, we present
the design of Cowbot, an autonomous weed mowing robot for
maintaining cow pastures. Cowbot is designed to operate in rugged
environments and provides a cost-effective method for weed control
in cow pastures. Path planning for the Cowbot is challenging since
weed distribution on pastures is unknown. Given an onboard sensor
with a limited field of view, online planning is necessary to detect
weeds and plan paths to mow them. We study the general online
coverage planning problem for an autonomous mower with curvature and field of view constraints. We develop two algorithms that
are able to utilize new information on weed detection to optimize
path length and ensure coverage. We deploy our algorithms on the
Cowbot and perform field experiments to validate the suitability of
our methods for real-time path planning. We also perform extensive
simulation experiments which show that our algorithms result in
up to 60% reduction in path length as compared to boustrophedon
and random-search based coverage paths.
Index Terms—Agricultural automation, field robots, motion and
path planning, nonholonomic motion planning.

I. INTRODUCTION
AIRY pastures constitute about one third of the land in
the United States [1]. A single dairy farm averages around
460 acres. Maintaining these large pastures to prevent weeds
from taking over the nutritious grasslands is a daunting task,
especially in organic farms that do not use herbicides. Many
recent projects have developed robotic weeding solutions for
outdoor [2]–[5] and indoor (greenhouse) [6], [7] weed control
applications in agriculture. However, robotic weed removal efforts to-date have primarily focused on crop-cultivating farms
that practice row-plantation. By virtue of row plantations, the
robots have a strong prior on the outlay of the field and the
location of weeds - inter-row and intra-row. Cow pastures on the
other hand are usually large fields with little to no regular maintenance. In the case of organic dairy farms, that form the focus
group for this work, weed growth is significant and can spread
fast if not controlled in time. Rough uneven terrain combined

D

Manuscript received September 10, 2021; accepted January 23, 2022. Date of
publication February 24, 2022; date of current version March 16, 2022. This letter was recommended for publication by Associate Editor N. Kottege and Editor
P. Pounds upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported
in part by MN LCCMR Program and in part by USDA. (Corresponding author:
Parikshit Maini.)
The authors are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail:
pmaini@umn.edu; gonul004@umn.edu; isler@umn.edu).
This letter has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2022.3154006, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LRA.2022.3154006

Fig. 1. Cowbot - autonomous weed mower operating on a cow pasture. As
shown in the image on the right, weeds on cow pastures can grow up to 1-2
meters tall.

with large and dense weed populations makes it challenging to
operate in cow pastures. This results in the need to develop a
robust and intelligent robotic weeding platform.
In this paper, we present the design of our autonomous weed
mowing robot for cow pastures called Cowbot (Fig. 1). Cowbot is
designed to operate in the rugged environments on cow pastures
and provides a cost-effective method for weed control in organic
fields. The density of weeds on a pasture affects the cost of
operation of the Cowbot. In fields with dense weed cover, a boustrophedon coverage path [8] is usually the most efficient path to
mow all weeds. In case of low density or localized distribution
of weeds, a boustrophedon path results in considerable wastage
of resources, specially on large fields. We assume a finite field of
view of the Cowbot within which it is able to detect and localize
all weeds. Then, an intuitive solution is to perform a random
search on the pasture and mow weeds as they are detected.
This strategy would eventually allow the Cowbot to mow all
weeds but as shown in Section VII, it is not cost effective since
the random search results in repetitive coverage of same areas.
Another major drawback to any random search based method is
not knowing when to terminate. Common termination criteria
include stopping when no new weeds are detected for a period of
time or when a threshold for maximum path length (or time) is
reached. This necessitates the design of intelligent path planning
algorithms to ensure all weeds on the pasture are detected and
mowed by the autonomous mower. We refer to the online path
planning for Cowbot as the mower routing problem (MRP). In
this paper, we present a formulation for MRP and develop two
online path planning algorithms, called JUMP and SNAKE, to
compute efficient solutions. Our path planning algorithms use
new information about weeds on the pasture to improve path
length by up to 60 % as compared to boustrophedon and randomsearch based coverage paths. We implement our algorithms on
the Cowbot and perform field experiments to validate that our

2377-3766 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5446

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 2, APRIL 2022

algorithms are suitable for real-time path planning. We also
perform large-scale computational simulations and benchmark
the performance of our solution methods with online and offline
baseline methods. We show that JUMP provides 100% weed
coverage while trading off in terms of path length as the number
of weeds increases. SNAKE is best suited for low density weed
populations and R-SNAKE (a variant of SNAKE) provides an
efficient alternative when 100% weed removal is not essential.

II. RELATED WORK
The design and development of mobile robots for weed
removal applications has witnessed growth in recent years.
Bakker et al. [9] have designed a weeding robot for intra-row
weed removal. Bawden et al. [2] develop a versatile agricultural robot equipped with a heterogeneous set of weeding implements and develop weed detection methods. Grimstad and
From [10] present the design of Thorvald agricultural robot and
demonstrate the robustness and modularity of their design in
field trials. While there exists literature on weed detection and
system design, there is relatively little work on path planning
for agricultural robots beyond coverage path planning. Weed
distribution on pastures is not known a priori and is hard to
estimate. As a result boustrophedon-like coverage paths can lead
to large wastage of resources.
The mower routing problem finds relevance in many wellstudied problems such as variants of the traveling salesman
problem (TSP), coverage path planning (CPP) and curvature
constrained path planning. In dynamic TSP [11] for instance,
the distribution of city locations is unknown at the start of the
problem. However, unlike in MRP wherein the mower must
search for weeds on the pasture, city locations in dynamic TSP
are generated by a stochastic process and made available to
the salesman during path execution. Another variant of TSP
that requires the path to satisfy non-holonomic constraints of
a Dubins motion model [12] is called Dubins TSP [13]. While
both of these problems are similar to MRP, they do not capture all
of its constraints. Hence their solution methods cannot be used to
solve MRP. Coverage path planning also relates to MRP and addresses coverage of bounded spaces with a finite sensor footprint.
Galceran and Carreras [14] and more recently Khan et al. [15],
present literature reviews on CPP variants and their solutions.
Khan et al. [15] focus on CPP methods for curvature constrained
mobile robots. Online variants of CPP such as active [16]–[19]
and sensor-driven [20]–[23] coverage path planning also find
relevance to our work. The primary focus of this line of research
is to ensure that utility of data collected by the robot(s) is maximized based on application specific metrics. These application
areas include classification [18], [19], 3D reconstruction [16],
[17], aerial coverage [22], resolution-complete coverage [23],
[24], inspection to detect mines and/or chemicals [21], seabed
monitoring [17], [20] and ship hull inspection [16].
However, none of these problems and their solution methods
extend to MRP. In the case of MRP, in addition to online
and curvature-constrained coverage of the environment with its
sensing footprint, the robot must also visit each weed location

detected in the field using a different coverage footprint (mowing footprint). Existing work in the literature does not address
this coupled coverage requirement. A solution to MRP would
be useful in other similar applications such as detecting and
collecting trash [25], identifying and collecting high utility rock
samples for planetary rovers [26] and detecting & removing
rocks from agricultural fields. Existing work on these problems
only considers a subset of constraints of MRP and does not
deploy their algorithms on actual robots. For instance, [25]
considers a fully actuated robot model that does not have any
curvature constraints for trash picking and [26] addresses an
offline problem that assumes that the location of all sample sites
is available to the planetary rover a priori. There does not exist
any work in the literature that addresses MRP.
In this paper, we present the design of our autonomous weed
mowing robot for cow pastures called Cowbot. We formalize
the online coverage planning problem for the Cowbot to mow
weeds as the mower routing problem and develop two online
solution methods, called JUMP and SNAKE. We compare the
performance of our online planning methods with coverage and
TSP based solution methods. We also compare our methods
with a random-search based reactive online planner. We conduct
extensive simulations and show that our algorithms lead to up
to 60% shorter paths as compared to boustrophedon or randomsearch based methods by efficiently utilizing information about
weed locations. We also deploy our algorithms on the Cowbot
and conduct field experiments to verify computational efficiency
and suitability of our methods for real-time path planning.
Paper Organisation: We present the system design for Cowbot in Section III and formalize the problem statement for MRP
in Section IV. In Section V, we discuss preliminaries and develop
upper and lower bounds for the solution space. We present our
solution methods for MRP in Section VI. In Section VII and
VIII, we present results from simulations and field experiments,
respectively. In Section IX we discuss conclusions and identify
future directions to this work.

III. COWBOT SYSTEM DESIGN
Cowbot is built on the Toro Groundmaster 3280-D rotary
mower platform. It has a four-wheel drive transmission system
with steering control on the rear wheels and a turning radius of
1.5 m at the geometric center. It weighs around 800 kgs. It is
customized to operate with a 32 kW electric motor powered by
a 28.8 kWh lithium ion battery pack. It is designed to be a standalone solution for weed control. As part of the project, a cargo
trailer was equipped with retractable solar panels on the roof
and climbing ramps to house the Cowbot and recharge it on the
pasture without the need for any charging infrastructure. Cowbot
incorporates a suite of safety features including a wireless remote
emergency stop button, pressure activated perimeter bumpers
and emergency stop knobs on the front and back of the mower.
It comprises a flail-deck weeding implement to reduce the risk
of flying debris during autonomous operations. The flail-deck
has a cutting width of 1.3 m and weighs 225 kgs. It is custom
mounted with high ground clearance to achieve a cut-height of

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAINI et al.: ONLINE COVERAGE PLANNING FOR AN AUTONOMOUS WEED MOWING ROBOT WITH CURVATURE CONSTRAINTS

Fig. 2. (a) Robot model showing the robot (gray), detection field of view
(yellow), weeding implement (red) and weeds (solid disks) in the pasture. The
green disk shows an undetected weed on the pasture and blue disk shows a weed
detected by the mower within the detection field of view. (b) Cowbot operating
on steep slopes in the pasture.

5447

implement has a finite width, B. A weed is considered mowed
when the implement passes over it.
We also consider the mower model to consist of a weed
detection module that includes a suite of front facing imaging
sensors and continues to operate throughout the execution of a
path. The weed detection field of view (FOV) is finite, triangular
shaped and apexed at the front center of the mower (see Fig. 2(a)
for an illustration of the FOV). The depth, Sd , and width at the
farthest point in the FOV, Sw , define the range of the detection
module on the mower. The mower is able to detect and localize
a weed in the global frame of reference instantaneously as the
weed enters its FOV.
B. Problem Statement

20 cm (8 in.). The high cut ensures sufficient volume of grass for
the cows even after mowing while also stunting weed growth.
Cowbot uses a GPS-based point to point inertial navigation
system and is equipped with two multi-band RTK GNSS receiver units (SwiftNav Duro Inertial) with inbuilt IMU sensors
to provide high accuracy location and heading estimates. It is
also equipped with front facing imaging sensors that includes
two RGB-D cameras (Intel RealSense D455) and a lidar sensor
(Velodyne Puck VLP-16). The perception stack of the Cowbot
that aims to build capability for visual inertial navigation and
weed detection on the field is currently under development. The
sensors connect to an onboard laptop computer (Dell Precision
7530) that runs the navigation software. The navigation software
on Cowbot has a three-layer architecture. The top and middle
layers execute on the laptop and the bottom layer executes on a
programmable logic controller (TORO PLC model # - Tec 5004)
that controls the traction and steering systems. The top layer
is the perception and planning layer that takes input from the
user and on-board sensors, and plans paths for the mower. The
middle layer comprises of high level control modules for point
to point navigation. It communicates with the top layer over the
robot operating system (ROS) and takes as input the waypoint
path computed by the planner. It generates steering and speed
commands for the bottom layer. The bottom layer generates
signals for the electric motor and the hydraulic steering to follow
commanded speed and steering values. The middle and bottom
layers communicate using CANBUS messaging protocol.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we define the system model for the Cowbot
used in path planning and present the problem statement.

Let E be a rectangular pasture. E is assumed to be obstacle-free
and fully traversable by the mower. The mower does not have
any prior information on the location or distribution of weeds
within E. To ensure all weeds on the pasture are detected, the
mower must cover the entire pasture with its FOV and perform
path planning to visit and mow each of the detected weeds. The
Mower Routing Problem (MRP) can then be defined as follows:
Given a pasture E with unknown weed distribution and an
autonomous mower equipped with a front mounted weeding
implement and a finite FOV (as defined in Section IV-A), develop
an online path planning policy that plans a path for the mower to
detect and mow all weeds in E while minimizing the total length
of the path.
V. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we define the notation used to develop the solution methods, discuss Dubins path preliminaries and compute
bounds on the solution space to MRP.
Given a rectangular pasture E of size (L × W ), we consider
an inertial frame of reference such that the four corners of the
pasture are located at (0, 0), (L, 0), (L, W ) and (0, W ). For ease
of exposition we will refer to locations with bigger y-coordinates
as being located above locations with smaller y-coordinates, and
vice-versa as being located below. Current state of the mower is
represented as (xm , ym , θm ), where (xm , ym ) are the location
coordinates and θm is the heading angle. The mower maintains
a list, W, of weeds detected on the pasture that are yet to be
mowed. Each weed is marked as a point object on the field and
is identified by its location coordinates, wi = (xi , yi ).
A. Dubins Paths

A. System Model
As the Cowbot moves in the pasture, it sweeps the ground
with the weeding implement and mows any weeds that it passes
over. For the purpose of path planning, we approximate its motion model with non-holonomic motion constraints that follow
Dubins car-like vehicle model [12] and moves with a constant
forward speed. It has a finite turning radius, R, and similar to the
Cowbot is equipped with a front mounted weeding implement
(see Fig. 2) that it pushes as it moves forward. The weeding

We use primitives from Dubins shortest path algorithm for
curvature constrained vehicles [12] to compute traversable paths
for the Cowbot. Specifically we consider Dubins paths of the
type C + SC − , where C + and C − are circular arcs in opposite
direction and S is a straight line path. LSR and RSL paths are
realizations of the C + SC − path type, where R refers to a circular
arc in the clockwise direction and L refers to a circular arc in
the counter clockwise direction. Both circular arcs turn with the
minimum turn radius, R.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5448

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 2, APRIL 2022

B. Bounding the Solution Space
Weed distribution on the pasture significantly affects the
length of the mower’s path needed to mow all weeds. We present
two edge-case scenarios and use them to compute upper and
lower bounds on the solution space.
First, consider a pasture with a uniform weed distribution and
densely packed weeds. The mower must mow every point on
the pasture to ensure that all weeds are mowed. An optimal
mower path in this scenario is a boustrophedon coverage path
(BCP). A boustrophedon path [8] to cover the pasture comprises
of straight line passes of length L across the pasture that are
parallel to x-axis. Consecutive passes in the boustrophedon path
have opposite direction of motion and are B distance away from
each other. Let yp (i) be the y-coordinate corresponding to the
ith pass in the path and θp (i) be the direction of motion on the
pass. The first pass of the path is along the line, yp = B/2 and
the last pass is along the line yp =  W
B  × B − B/2. When it is
clear from the context we use yp and θp interchangeably with
yp (i) and θp (i), respectively. Such a path ensures all weeds on
the pasture are mowed regardless of the weed distribution and
provides an upper bound on the path length for the mower.
Second, consider the scenario with no weeds on the pasture.
Since the mower does not have any information about the weed
distribution, it must at least cover the pasture with its FOV
to search for weeds. Consider another BCP but with spacing
between consecutive passes equal to Sw . This reduces the total
number of passes by a factor of SBw . At the end of this path, the
mower has deterministic knowledge of all weed locations (or of
the absence of weeds) on the pasture. This is the minimum length
path needed for the mower to search for weeds on the pasture
and in the case no weeds are detected it forms the solution to
the MRP instance. This provides a lower bound on the solution
space of MRP.

VI. SOLUTION METHODS
In this section, we present solution methods to the mower
routing problem to detect and mow weeds on a pasture. We design two online planning algorithms, named JUMP and SNAKE,
that build on top of BCP. We present systematic modifications to
BCP that account for Cowbot’s curvature constraints and utilize
its FOV and width of the weeding implement to enable efficient
online coverage of the pasture.

A. JUMP Online Planning Algorithm
The JUMP planner modifies BCP by introducing the ideas of
jumps and spring. It computes a path for the mower that starts
at the bottom of the pasture and makes its way towards the top
while doing to-and-fro passes across the pasture much like a
boustrophedon path. A jump allows the mower to make detours
to mow nearby weeds within its FOV and then return back to
the current pass to continue on its path. Spring behavior of the
JUMP planner permits variable spacing between consecutive
passes, unlike BCP, resulting in a stretch and shrink pattern to
better utilize new information about weeds on the pasture.

Fig. 3. LSR-RSL jump to mow a weed at point (b) with θp = 0. (a) and (c)
are the start and end points of the jump.

When there are no weeds directly in front of the mower on its
current path, it makes a search for nearby weeds that it can mow
by making a quick detour. We restrict these detours to weeds
that are located above the current pass, thus leading to the name
jump. A jump consists of two sub-paths: first, to go up to the
weed’s location from the current position and second, to come
back down to the current pass. We use Dubins paths of type
RSL and LSR to compute sub-paths for a jump. Each jump is
defined by three waypoints: start and end points of the jump
and the location of the weed. We fix the heading angle at each
of the three waypoints to θp . When θp = 0, jumps comprise of
sub-path LSR to go to the weed and RSL to come back to the
path (Fig. 3), and vice-versa when θp = π. Ties among jumps
starting at the same point are broken arbitrarily.
At the end of a pass, the planner must compute yp (i + 1) value
for the next pass with θp (i + 1) = π − θp (i). It is computed as
the minimum of the three expressions in (1).
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨yp (i) + Sw /2
min yi + B/2
yp (i + 1) = min ∀i:w
(1)
i ∈W
⎪
⎪
⎩W − B/2
JUMP planner admits dynamic spacing between consecutive
passes allowing a spring-like behavior. To this end, the first
condition corresponds to maximum spacing (equal to Sw /2),
the second condition corresponds to the bottom-most unmowed
weed and admits tighter spacing (shrink), and the third condition
corresponds to the pass along the top edge of the pasture.
Note that, the first condition permits for yp (i + 1) < yp (i) thus
allowing the mower to go in the negative y-direction on the next
pass. This occurs when the mower detects a new weed that lies
below its current pass.
JUMP planner maintains the following two invariants
throughout its execution.
Invariant 1: At the start of a pass there does not exist any
unmowed weeds in W below (yp − B/2).
Proof: The invariant is true on the first pass by virtue of it
being at the bottom edge of the pasture. In consecutive passes,
the computation of yp ensures coverage of the bottom most weed
in W, thus maintaining the invariant.

Invariant 2: Consider Wstart to be a snapshot of W at the
start of a pass. At the end of the pass, there does not exist any
unmowed weeds in Wstart below (yp + B/2).
Proof: If the mower traverses a pass without any jumps, all
weeds in W below yp + B/2 are mowed. The planner computes
a jump for the mower only in the case when there are no weeds
in W on the current pass that will be skipped as a result of the
jump. This maintains the invariant at the end of each pass. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAINI et al.: ONLINE COVERAGE PLANNING FOR AN AUTONOMOUS WEED MOWING ROBOT WITH CURVATURE CONSTRAINTS

The two invariants along with the termination criteria (2),
ensure that the mower mows all weeds detected on the pasture.
(yp == W − B/2) ∩ (W == φ)

(2)

Termination criteria for JUMP is evaluated at the end of each
pass and evaluates to true if the mower has reached the top of
the pasture and there are no unmowed weeds left in W.
B. SNAKE Online Planning Algorithm
The SNAKE planner derives its name from serpentine to-andfro patterns across the pasture generated in paths computed by
the planner. It builds on top of the JUMP planner by allowing
detours in both directions. However, unlike JUMP, SNAKE does
not require the mower to return to its current pass after mowing
a weed, thus only completing the first sub-path on a jump. A
pass of the SNAKE path across the pasture often comprises of
a sequence of sub-paths to weed locations. SNAKE enforces a
consistent direction of motion on a pass by fixing the heading
angle at each weed location to θp .
At the start of a pass, the planner makes a search for the closest
weed in W that lies ahead of the mower along its direction of
motion. If θp = 0, it considers Dubins paths of type LSR and
RSL to compute sub-paths to weeds located above and below
ym respectively, and vice-versa when θp = π. While the mower
is executing a sub-path, the planner does not search for new
sub-paths. It resumes the search when the mower completes a
sub-path. If there do not exist any weeds in W along the mower’s
direction of motion, the mower continues to move straight ahead
with heading angle θm = θp . When the mower reaches the end of
the pasture along its direction of motion, the planner computes
yp (i + 1) value (using (3)) for the start of the next pass with
θp (i + 1) = π − θp (i).

yp (i) + Sw /2 + B/2
yp (i + 1) = min
(3)
W − B/2
The value for yp (i + 1) is computed as the minimum of the
two expressions in (3). The first expression corresponds to
fixed spacing between passes (equal to Sw /2 + B/2) and the
second expression corresponds to the pass starting along the top
edge of the pasture. Note that, in the case of SNAKE, yp only
determines the start point of a pass. The mower typically veers
off of yp while executing sub-paths to mow weeds. It continues
traversing on consecutive passes across the pasture alternating
in its direction of motion until the termination criteria is met.
Termination criteria for SNAKE ((4)) is evaluated at the end
of each pass. It evaluates to true if the mower has reached the
top of the pasture and there are no unmowed weeds left in W.
The mower is determined to have reached the top of the pasture
if the current pass starts along the top edge of the pasture i.e.
yp = W − B/2, and the mower’s current location is also along
the top edge i.e. ym ≥ W − B.
(ym ≥ W − B) ∩ (yp == W − B/2) ∩ (W == φ)

(4)

We also define a variation of the SNAKE planner called
RESTRICTED-SNAKE (R-SNAKE) that trades off weed coverage in favor of shorter path length for the mower. While SNAKE

5449

admits sub-paths to all unmowed weeds along its direction of
motion, R-SNAKE restricts its search to weeds, wi ≡ (xi , yi ),
located at most a fixed threshold below the yp value of the current
pass i.e.:
3
(5)
y i ≥ y p − Sw
2
R-SNAKE uses the termination criteria given in (6) and evaluates
it at the end of each pass. As is apparent from the termination
criteria, R-SNAKE can potentially miss some weeds on the
pasture.
(ym ≥ W − B) ∩ (yp == W − B/2)

(6)

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
To evaluate the performance of the online planning algorithms
presented in Section VI we designed a simulated pasture environment and an autonomous mower operating on the pasture.
The simulator was implemented in Python 3 programming language and uses PyDubins [27] and Elkai [28] libraries to compute Dubins paths and TSP tours, respectively. The simulations
were run on a desktop computer with AMD Ryzen 7 processor
and 32 GB RAM. Psuedocode for our algorithms is available
at [29]. We compare the performance of our online algorithms
with three baseline solutions. First, the boustrophedon coverage
path (BCP) used to compute upper bounds on the path length for
MRP as given in Section V-B. We recall that path length in case of
BCP is independent of the weed density and spatial distribution
and is determined by the size of the pasture and mower’s parameters. The second baseline called BCP-TSP comprises of two
phases. The first phase involves visual coverage of the pasture
using the lower bounding BCP (as described in Section V-B),
while also mowing any weeds that lie directly on the mower’s
path. The second phase computes a TSP tour for the mower
to visit unmowed weeds detected in the first phase. The third
baseline is an online reactive planner (REACT) that performs
a random search for weeds on the pasture and mows weeds
in the order they are detected. The planner generates random
waypoints for the mower to perform a search. When it detects
a weed, the mower aborts the random search and starts to visit
weed locations in FIFO order while still detecting new weeds
that enter the mower FOV. It resumes the random search once all
detected weeds are mowed. It terminates when the path length
equals BCP path length (upper bound).
A. Simulation Setup
We perform the simulations in a pasture of size 100 m × 40 m.
To populate weeds on the pasture we use two different spatial
distributions, uniform (U ) and Gaussian (G). In the case of
Gaussian distribution, 20% of the weeds are sampled uniformly
at random and chosen as seeds for Gaussian clusters used to
generate rest of the weed locations. Fig. 4 shows simulation
instances with uniform (Fig. 4(b), (c) and (d)) and Gaussian
(Fig. 4(f), (g) and (h)) weed distributions and paths planned by
the different planners. The mower is configured to operate with
a constant speed of 1 m/s and comprises of a front mounted
weeding implement of width B = 2m. We vary the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5450

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 2, APRIL 2022

Fig. 4. (a) upper bounding BCP path. (e) lower bounding BCP path. (b)-(d)
show uniform distribution of weeds on a simulated pasture with 40, 160 and 640
weeds respectively. (f)-(h) show Gaussian distribution of weeds on a simulated
pasture with 40, 160 and 640 weeds respectively.
TABLE I
RANGE OF VALUES OF VARIOUS SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Fig. 6. The plots show trends in (a) path length and (b) % of weeds mowed, as
a function of number of weeds on the pasture for various planning algorithms.
Both plots show trends for both uniform and Gaussian distributions. Values for
other parameters: R = 2m, Sd = 12m, Sw = 12m.

Fig. 7. The plots show trends in (a) path length and (b) % of weeds mowed, as
a function of turning radius of the mower. The plots show data points averaged
over all sizes of weed population. Fixed parameters: Sd = 12m, Sw = 12m.

Fig. 5. Sample paths for the Cowbot planned using various planning algorithms to mow 40 weeds on a simulated pasture. Green area marks the pasture
boundary, red disks mark the weeds and the solid blue line shows the mower
path. (a) JUMP (b) SNAKE (c) R-SNAKE (d) BCP (e) BCP-TSP (f) REACT.

weeds N = ||W|| on the pasture (in turn the weed density),
detection FOV and turning radius of the mower to study their
effect on paths computed by the online planners. For each
combination of weed distribution (U/G) and weed count N ,
we generate 100 random instances. Table I lists the names and
range of values for each of the simulation parameters.
B. Results
We use two evaluation metrics to compare and evaluate the
performance of our solution methods - a) length of the mower’s
path and b) percentage of weeds mowed on the pasture. For ease
of exposition we express the path length as a percentage of BCP
path length that provides an upper bound on the solution space
for MRP. We remark that (a) BCP ensures 100% weed coverage
and by definition has path length equal to 100%, (b) BCP-TSP
ensures 100% weed coverage on the pasture while trading-off in
terms of path length and (c) REACT trades-off weed coverage
in favor of fixed path length equal to 100% of the BCP length.
1) Effect of weed density: Density of weeds on the pasture
visibly affects the path length (Fig. 6); it increases consistently
with increase in the number of weeds for all planning algorithms.
For smaller weed populations, each of our online planning

algorithms - JUMP, SNAKE and R-SNAKE - leads to large
improvement in path length, by up to 60%, as compared to
BCP and REACT. SNAKE and R-SNAKE are best suited for
low density weed populations. In scenarios, where 100% weed
coverage is not required, R-SNAKE provides an efficient method
to reduce path length. As the weed density increases beyond a
threshold, it is more efficient to mow the entire pasture instead
of visiting individual weed locations. We observe that path
length for JUMP converges to BCP length and does not increase
proportionally. This is expected since JUMP shrinks the spacing
between consecutive passes to accommodate the higher density
and starts to mimic a BCP path. SNAKE and R-SNAKE do not
support variable spacing and hence, do not have a mechanism to
accommodate the high density of weeds. Path length for these
two planners increases consistently with increase in the size of
the weed population.
Fig. 6(b) shows additional insights on the effects of weed
density. The percentage of weeds mowed by the random-search
based reactive planner (REACT) drops drastically as the weed
density increases since the effect of repetitive area coverage
due to random sampling becomes more pronounced. JUMP and
SNAKE planners on the other hand, ensure 100% and 99.4%
weed coverage, respectively. R-SNAKE planner leads to 97.5
% coverage on average, even though the detection rate for RSNAKE is ∼100 %. This is consistent with its design philosophy
to trade-off weed coverage in favor of shorter path length and
also explains the observation that R-SNAKE consistently has
shorter path length than SNAKE.
2) Effect of turning radius: We make two major observations
from Fig. 7(a) and (b) showing the effects of turning radius
on the performance of the planning algorithms. First, the weed

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAINI et al.: ONLINE COVERAGE PLANNING FOR AN AUTONOMOUS WEED MOWING ROBOT WITH CURVATURE CONSTRAINTS

5451

Fig. 8. The plots show trends in path length, (a) and (c), and % of weeds mowed, (b) and (d), as a function of change in FOV of the mower. (a) and (b) show
variation with FOV width and (c) and (d) show variation with FOV depth. The figure plots data averaged over all R values. Sd was set to 12 m for (a) and (b), and
Sw was set to 12 m for (c) and (d).

coverage of R-SNAKE decreases with increase in turn radius.
As the mower moves to the top, weeds towards the bottom of the
pasture are not considered anymore for mowing thus decreasing
weed coverage. Large turn radius reduces the mower’s agility
and results in fewer subpaths on each pass, thus magnifying the
effect of restricted range of R-SNAKE. Second, when turn radius
is very small, path length for JUMP shows an abrupt increase.
On investigation, we found that small turn radius makes it easier
for the mower to compute jumps to mow nearby weeds. This
increases the number of jumps on the mower’s path, thereby
increasing the path length.
3) Effect of detection range: Contrary to intuition, we found
that depth of the FOV does not have any noticeable effect on path
length (Fig. 8(c)). Width of the FOV, on the other hand, has a
more pronounced effect on path length. We observe a parabolic
trend in the path length for our online planners when the width
of the detection FOV, Sw , is varied (Fig. 8(a)).
We note that Sw affects the detection of weeds that do not lie
on the current pass. In the case of JUMP, when the FOV is narrow,
the path has negligible number of jumps and converges to BCP.
When the FOV is wide, the mower’s path comprises of excessive
number of jumps resulting in an increase in the path length.
In the case of SNAKE and R-SNAKE, a narrow FOV leads to
missed detection of weeds on the pasture resulting in reduced
weed coverage (Fig. 8(b)). In case of R-SNAKE (Fig. 8(b) and
(d)), the effect of smaller FOV due to either of Sd or Sw is
magnified due to its restriction of movement, leading to missed
weed detections and reduced coverage.

VIII. FIELD EXPERIMENTS
Cowbot has been tested extensively on multiple farm fields
with different types of terrain. It is able to mow large and
dense weed populations and is able to operate in the rugged
environment on cow pastures. The custom designed navigation
controller for Cowbot was tuned extensively in environments
with varying topography including grass fields, steep hills, cow
pastures with dense vegetation and rough terrain. The cut-quality
of Cowbot and performance of the navigation controller were
tested using BCP paths on cow pastures. Fig. 9 shows aerial
views of a cow pasture located in Morris, Minnesota before
and after a Cowbot BCP mowing experiment. To evaluate the
performance of the online planning algorithms for Cowbot, field
experiments were conducted on a farm field located near Morgan

Fig. 9. Before (a) and after (b) aerial views of a cow pasture of size 90 × 20 sq.
meters mowed by the Cowbot with a boustrophedon coverage path. The pasture
boundary in the before image is highlighted by a mowed perimeter.

Fig. 10. Visualization of the path followed by Cowbot in field experiments
using different online planning algorithms: (a) JUMP (b) SNAKE (c) R-SNAKE.
Green area marks the boundary of the pasture area and red disks show the location
of weed markers on the field.

in Minnesota, United States during Cowbot’s public demonstrations at the Minnesota Farm Fest 2021. The experiments were
conducted in an area of size 36 × 26 sq. meters.
For the purpose of these experiments we assume the availability of a weed detection module with a detection FOV of
size (Sd , Sw ) ≡ (8, 6), similar in configuration to the mower
model discussed in Section VI. To visualize the experiments we
geotagged 14 weed locations, sampled uniformly at random, on
the field and marked them with flags. Cowbot’s instantaneous
FOV was computed based on its location and heading estimates.
When a geotagged weed entered the FOV of the mower it was
marked as detected and it’s location information was made
available to the planner. We conducted field experiments for
JUMP, SNAKE and R-SNAKE planning algorithms. The BCP
path length computed offline for the pasture is 897.00 m. Length
of JUMP, SNAKE and R-SNAKE paths followed by the Cowbot
on the field were 410.78 m (45.79%), 337.94 m (37.67%) and
338.04 m (37.68%) respectively. The numbers in bracket show
the relative path length to the BCP path. Each of the mower
paths was able to mow all 14 weeds on the field. Fig. 10 traces
the paths followed by the Cowbot for each of the three online
planners. The experiments show that Cowbot is well suited to
mow weeds on pastures and our online planning algorithms
are computationally efficient to deploy on real-time systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5452

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 2, APRIL 2022

Experiment video showing the Cowbot in action is included in
the multimedia attachment.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Lawn mowers and smaller robotic platforms are not well
suited for operating in dairy farms. We presented the design
of Cowbot, our autonomous weed mowing robot to operate in
rugged terrain on cow pastures. The density and distribution of
weeds on a pasture can vary significantly. As a result, coverage
paths do not always provide the most efficient solution. We formulated the mower routing problem and developed online path
planning algorithms, named JUMP and SNAKE (and R-SNAKE
as a variant of SNAKE), to efficiently detect and mow weeds on
the pasture. We deployed our online planning algorithms on the
Cowbot and validated their suitability for real-time path planning
in field experiments. We also performed large scale simulated
experiments to compare the performance of our planners with
multiple baseline methods. We conclude that SNAKE and RSNAKE are best suited for low density weed populations and
R-SNAKE provides an efficient alternative when 100% weed
removal is not essential. JUMP consistently provides 100%
weed coverage in all scenarios including very high weed density
and shows an asymptotic increase in path length with increase
in the number of weeds.
We are currently working on incorporating on board computer
vision algorithms on the Cowbot to detect weeds on the fly. In
our future work we would also like to address energy efficiency,
robustness and safety of operating Cowbot.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Cowbot was developed as part of the project titled ‘Agricultural Weed Control using Autonomous Mowers’ funded by
Minnesota State LCCMR (Legislative-Citizen Commission on
Minnesota Resources) program. The project is a collaboration
between University of Minnesota and the Toro Company.
REFERENCES
[1] “USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2017 census of agriculture,” Accessed: Sep. 09, 2021. [Online]. Available: www.nass.usda.gov/
AgCensus
[2] O. Bawden et al., “Robot for weed species plant-specific management,” J.
Field Robot., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1179–1199, 2017.
[3] F. K. van Evert et al., “A robot to detect and control broad-leaved dock
(rumex obtusifolius l) in grassland,” J. Field Robot., vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 264–277, 2011.
[4] M. Pérez-Ruíz, D. C. Slaughter, F. A. Fathallah, C. J. Gliever, and B.
J. Miller, “Co-robotic intra-row weed control system,” Biosyst. Eng.,
vol. 126, pp. 45–55, 2014.
[5] K. D. Hansen et al., “An autonomous robotic system for mapping weeds
in fields,” Int. Federation Accountants Proc. Volumes, vol. 46, no. 10,
pp. 217–224, 2013.
[6] R. Oberti et al., “Selective spraying of grapevines for disease control using
a modular agricultural robot,” Biosyst. Eng., vol. 146, pp. 203–215, 2016.

[7] R. Barth, J. Hemming, and E. J. van Henten, “Design of an eye-in-hand
sensing and servo control framework for harvesting robotics in dense
vegetation,” Biosyst. Eng., vol. 146, pp. 71–84, 2016.
[8] H. Choset, “Coverage of known spaces: The boustrophedon cellular decomposition,” Auton. Robots, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 247–253, 2000.
[9] T. Bakker, K. Asselt, J. Bontsema, J. Müller, and G. Straten, “Systematic
design of an autonomous platform for robotic weeding,” J. Terramechanics, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 63–73, 2010.
[10] L. Grimstad and P. J. From, “The thorvald II agricultural robotic system,”
Robotics, vol. 6, no. 4, p. 24, 2017.
[11] V. Pillac, M. Gendreau, C. Guéret, and A. L. Medaglia, “A review of
dynamic vehicle routing problems,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 225, no. 1,
pp. 1–11, 2013.
[12] L. E. Dubins, “On curves of minimal length with a constraint on average
curvature, and with prescribed initial and terminal positions and tangents,”
Amer. J. Math., vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 497–516, 1957.
[13] S. Rathinam, R. Sengupta, and S. Darbha, “A resource allocation algorithm
for multivehicle systems with nonholonomic constraints,” IEEE Trans.
Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 98–104, Jun. 2007.
[14] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning
for robotics,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1258–1276,
2013.
[15] A. Khan, I. Noreen, and Z. Habib, “On complete coverage
path planning algorithms for non-holonomic mobile robots: Survey
and challenges,” J. Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 101–121,
2017.
[16] G. A. Hollinger, B. Englot, F. S. Hover, U. Mitra, and G. S. Sukhatme,
“Active planning for underwater inspection and the benefit of adaptivity,”
Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 3–18, 2013.
[17] Z. Shen, J. P. Wilson, and S. Gupta, “An online coverage path planning
algorithm for curvature-constrained AUVs,” in Proc. Oceans MTS/IEEE
SEATTLE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[18] G. A. Hollinger, U. Mitra, and G. S. Sukhatme, “Active Classification:
Theory and Application to Underwater Inspection,” in Robotics Research,
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017, pp. 95–110.
[19] M. Popović, G. Hitz, J. Nieto, I. Sa, R. Siegwart, and E. Galceran, “Online
informative path planning for active classification using uavs,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2017, pp. 5753–5758.
[20] N. Kapctanović, N. Mišković, and A. Tahirović, “Information gain-guided
online coverage path planning for side-scan sonar survey missions,” in
Proc. 26th Mediterranean Conf. Control Automat., 2018, pp. 1–9.
[21] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Sensor-driven online coverage planning for autonomous underwater vehicles,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1827–1838, Dec. 2013.
[22] L. Paull, C. Thibault, A. Nagaty, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Sensor-driven area
coverage for an autonomous fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicle,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1605–1618, Sep. 2014.
[23] X. Kan, H. Teng, and K. Karydis, “Online exploration and coverage planning in unknown obstacle-cluttered environments,” IEEE Robot. Automat.
Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 5969–5976, Oct. 2020.
[24] J. Song and S. Gupta, “ε : An online coverage path planning algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 526–533, Apr. 2018.
[25] C.-H. Chiang, “Vision-based coverage navigation for robot trash collection
task,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Robot. Intell. Syst., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[26] J. C. Cardema, P. K. C. Wang, and G. Rodriguez, “Optimal path planning
of mobile robots for sample collection,” J. Robot. Syst., vol. 21, no. 10,
pp. 559–580, 2004.
[27] A. Walker, “Dubins-curves: An open implementation of shortest paths
for the forward only car,” 2008. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
AndrewWalker/Dubins-Curves
[28] F. Dimitrovski, “elkai - A python 3 tsp solver,” 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/fikisipi/elkai
[29] P. Maini, B. M. Gonultas, and V. Isler, “Online coverage planning for
an autonomous weed mowing robot with curvature constraints,” 2021,
arXiv:2111.10462.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Chinese Academy of SciencesCAS. Downloaded on May 24,2023 at 06:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

